---
layout: single
title: On Hong Kong
date: 2019-11-27 14:00:00 +0530
excerpt: Looking back at 
tags: Hong-Kong CUHK
categories: travel academics
comments: true
classes: wide
---
I shall always have a soft spot for Hong Kong and the people there. It started almost the day I landed in the city. I took my luggage, got on a taxi and it dropped me off just inside the CUHK campus, and I had no idea where to go to meet the contact person in the department I would be interning in. I had no idea the campus would be that hilly, and I had of course not discovered any of the routes through buildings that made navigating the campus far less exhausting over time, so I looked for directions on Google Maps and began to follow them to the department, lugging all my luggage along. By the time I got to the department, one hour later, I was sweaty and tired, so much that I spent about 10 minutes in the washroom attempting to freshen up before presenting myself to the people there. After I made my presence known and got to know where I would be staying, I had to find that place too. I left most of the luggage in the lab and set out to find that place… only to see that it didn’t show up on Google Maps. After about 20 minutes of walking around and getting quite lost, I was peering at a campus map when an elderly lady of about 60 showed up, asking me if I was new to the place and where I wanted to go. On hearing that I was, in fact, new, she walked for nearly 10 minutes to show me where I had to go. That was totally unexpected - in India, city folks would tell you which direction to go, but they would not walk for that long in a different direction from which they had to go - and that entire episode made me feel immediately at home. The CUHK campus itself had a way of making you feel that you belong - there are buildings made in a way that you can get in on the ground floor and take an elevator that would raise you 8 floors, and once you got to know these routes, you could journey up the hill with no problem at all. Getting to know the short-cuts made me feel like I had spent a long time there, even though I was there for barely one-and-a-half months.

Also, Hong Kong was the first place I really roamed around alone - before that my parents accompanied me wherever I went to and the city where my undergrad college is situated isn’t really the most interesting or convenient city to explore. Every weekend I left walked down the hill to the metro and travelled to the middle of the city, seeking out something I had read about the day before on Google and found interesting. While coming back my phone would be almost out of charge, and I would need to know which metro stop to get down at and the way back to my room because Google couldn't help me any more. I realised that one could just take their phone and travel fearlessly to any part of a modern city like that, doing it cheaply and conveniently.

Even on the day I left - I carried two large suitcases on the metro during rush hour. If I tried that on the Kolkata metro, people would be passing comments about how incorrigible people like me make travelling on the metro a harrowing experience, and Kolkata is a milder city relative to a city like Delhi. Hell, when I was in high school, people sometimes objected to me carrying a school bag in the metro. In Hong Kong, no one said anything, and in fact, were careful not to bump into me or my luggage. Now, I would be an easy target because I really stood out among the people there, but no one said anything and I loved it (I was really apprehensive that it wouldn’t end well). I had also been waiting for the moon cakes to hit the shelves before I left, and they did on the very day of my flight so that was awesome too!

All of this and I haven’t even mentioned the amazing research group I was a part of and the advisor I had there and what the city meant to me academically. I had recently changed my research area drastically and was lucky to even find an internship in my new area. The time in Hong Kong not only gave me a wonderful advisor whose recommendation letter and general guidance made navigating graduate school applications and finally getting and deciding on an offer a much smoother experience, but the papers I wrote directly based on the work I did there helped my applications and gave me the confidence that I wouldn’t feel like a fish out of water while doing my PhD. We went on research meetings on the Hong Kong beaches, enjoyed Chinese food at restaurants recommended by my advisor there and so on and so forth - there’s a lot!

The fact that all of this was just a year back and now there’s so much turmoil in the city saddens me, but as I said earlier, I am in a way proud of the people there. It helps that I have a personal connection to the city and really thought of it as home for the time I was there, so it feels like people I know are the ones protesting. I know this might feel awfully melodramatic coming from someone who barely spent six weeks in the city, but I can’t help the way I genuinely feel, can I?